SPIN Algorithm (#108)
NVIDIA/NeMo-Aligner: docs/user-guide/SPIN.rst

SFT vs Foundational (base) model for SPIN Training
##################################################
Unlike DPO and PPO, SPIN was designed to be run on foundational (base) models, that is, models which have only been trained on autoregressive language prediction tasks and not on instruction following tasks.
However, you can also run SPIN on models which have been SFTed on instruction-based datasets as well, similar to DPO/PPO. Either type of model will work well with SPIN. If you would like to start with a supervised fine tuned model instead of a base model, please see our full guide on how to perform SFT on a Megatron GPT model :ref:`SFT guide <sft>`.

SPIN Model Training
###################

SPIN training uses the exact same dataset formatting and files as the NeMo-Aligner SFT trainer. Please see the data formatting section of SFT to understand the data format necessary for SPIN :ref:`SFT guide <sft>`

Once your data is processed into the correct format you are ready to begin SPIN training. You must start with a pretrained or SFT trained model. For this section we will use the SFT model trained in the previous step to train the SPIN model.

> For the purposes of the following sections, we'll assuming your training jsonl file is located in ``/path/to/train_spin_format.jsonl`` and your validation jsonl file is located in ``/path/to/valid_spin_format.jsonl``.

Reviewer: Small typo
```suggestion
For the purposes of the following sections, we'll assume your training jsonl file is located in ``/path/to/train_spin_format.jsonl`` and your validation jsonl file is located in ``/path/to/valid_spin_format.jsonl``.
```

Author: Fixed, thanks

> For the below parameters, the ``model.spin.ref_policy_kl_penalty`` corresponds to the beta parameter in the SPIN paper, and ``trainer.spin.max_iterations`` corresponds to T (with ``trainer.spin.max_epochs`` per iteration)

Reviewer: Missing "epochs"
```suggestion
For the below parameters, the ``model.spin.ref_policy_kl_penalty`` corresponds to the beta parameter in the SPIN paper, and ``trainer.spin.max_iterations`` corresponds to T (with ``trainer.spin.max_epochs`` epochs per iteration)
```

Author: Fixed, thanks

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Terminal
        :sync: key3

         To run SPIN model training on the terminal directly

         .. code-block:: bash 

            export GPFS="/path/to/nemo-aligner-repo"
            export TRAIN_DATA_PATH="/path/to/train_spin_format.jsonl"
            export VALID_DATA_PATH="/path/to/valid_spin_format.jsonl"

            python -u ${GPFS}/examples/nlp/gpt/train_gpt_spin.py \
               trainer.num_nodes=1 \
               trainer.devices=8 \

>                ++model.mcore_gpt=true \

Reviewer: This line can be removed (already in the default config and should never be changed)

Author: Fixed, thanks

               ++model.micro_batch_size=1 \
               ++model.global_batch_size=64 \
               pretrained_checkpoint.restore_from_path=/path/to/megatron_gpt_sft.nemo \
               "model.data.train_ds.file_path=${TRAIN_DATA_PATH}" \
               "model.data.validation_ds.file_path=${VALID_DATA_PATH}" \
               exp_manager.create_wandb_logger=false \
               exp_manager.wandb_logger_kwargs.project=spin_training \
               exp_manager.wandb_logger_kwargs.name=spin_training \
               exp_manager.explicit_log_dir=/results \
               ++trainer.spin.max_iterations=1 \
               ++trainer.spin.max_epochs=1 \
               ++model.spin.ref_policy_kl_penalty=0.1
               ++model.spin.length_params.max_length=2048 \

>                ++model.data.train_ds.max_seq_length=4096 \

Reviewer: Couple of comments:
1. Small syntax error probably due to moving lines around => the line with `ref_policy_kl_penalty` should end with a `\` and the last line shouldn't
2. Better remove the `++` in front of all of these options since they are in our config so the `++` is useless (otherwise it's confusing as to why we need `++`, and also we may not notice that our tutorials are broken if a variable is renamed)

Author: Fixed, thanks

    .. tab-item:: Slurm
        :sync: key4

>          To run SPIN model training using Slurm. The script below uses 32 nodes, but you can change the node count to something smaller.

Reviewer: Any reason to use such a high number of nodes? I'm afraid people may get scared that our implementation requires 256 GPUs just to train a small (2B / 7B) model.

Author: We currently use 32 nodes for a 7B model because generation takes so much time, so I carried it across. I have since changed it to 4 nodes in the example (since we're using a 2B model instead of 7B)

            #SBATCH --gpus-per-node 8
            #SBATCH --exclusive
            #SBATCH --overcommit

            GPFS="/path/to/nemo-aligner-repo"
            PRETRAINED_CHECKPOINT_NEMO_FILE="/path/to/megatron_gpt_sft.nemo"

            TRAIN_DATA_PATH="/path/to/train_spin_format.jsonl"
            VALID_DATA_PATH="/path/to/valid_spin_format.jsonl"

            PROJECT="<<WANDB PROJECT>>"

            CONTAINER=<<<CONTAINER>>> # use the latest NeMo Training container, Aligner will work there
            MOUNTS="--container-mounts=${GPFS}:${GPFS},${TRAIN_DATA_PATH}:${TRAIN_DATA_PATH},${VALID_DATA_PATH}:${VALID_DATA_PATH},${PRETRAINED_CHECKPOINT_NEMO_FILE}:${PRETRAINED_CHECKPOINT_NEMO_FILE}"

            RESULTS_DIR="/path/to/result_dir"

            OUTFILE="${RESULTS_DIR}/rm-%j_%t.out"
            ERRFILE="${RESULTS_DIR}/rm-%j_%t.err"
            mkdir -p ${RESULTS_DIR}

            read -r -d '' cmd <<EOF
            echo "*******STARTING********" \
            && echo "---------------" \
            && echo "Starting training" \
            && cd ${GPFS} \
            && export PYTHONPATH="${GPFS}:${PYTHONPATH}" \
            && export HYDRA_FULL_ERROR=1 \

>             && python -u ${GPFS}/examples/nlp/gpt/train_gpt_dpo.py \

Reviewer: Missed one ;)
```suggestion
            && python -u ${GPFS}/examples/nlp/gpt/train_gpt_spin.py \
```

Author: Fixed, thanks

               trainer.num_nodes=${SLURM_JOB_NUM_NODES} \
               trainer.devices=8 \
               pretrained_checkpoint.restore_from_path='${PRETRAINED_CHECKPOINT_NEMO_FILE}' \
               "model.data.train_ds.file_path=${TRAIN_DATA_PATH}" \
               "model.data.validation_ds.file_path=${VALID_DATA_PATH}" \
               ++model.micro_batch_size=1 \
               ++model.global_batch_size=64 \
               exp_manager.explicit_log_dir=${RESULTS_DIR} \
               exp_manager.create_wandb_logger=True \
               exp_manager.wandb_logger_kwargs.name=${NAME} \
               exp_manager.wandb_logger_kwargs.project=${PROJECT} \
               ++trainer.spin.max_iterations=1 \
               ++trainer.spin.max_epochs=1 \
               ++model.spin.ref_policy_kl_penalty=0.1
               ++model.spin.length_params.max_length=2048 \

>                ++model.data.train_ds.max_seq_length=4096 \

Reviewer: Same two comments as above (on `\` and `++`)

Author: Fixed, thanks

            EOF

            srun -o $OUTFILE -e $ERRFILE --container-image=$CONTAINER $MOUNTS bash -c "${cmd}"
            set +x

> During SPIN training, there will be several metrics recorded to WandB which you can monitor, chiefly acc (representing the percentage amount whereby the model's actual [ground truth label] rewards are greater than the generated rewards [generated by the reference policy]).

Reviewer: This may be a bit confusing because the reference policy doesn't generate rewards.

What about for instance
```suggestion
During SPIN training, there will be several metrics recorded to WandB which you can monitor, chiefly acc (representing the percentage amount whereby the model's implicit reward for the ground truth response is greater than for the response generated by the reference policy).
```

Author: I changed, it thanks for the suggestion

The ``reward`` in this case is calculated as the difference between model log probs and the reference log probs, multiplied by the KL penalty (beta in the original paper), for the ground truth and generated responses.
During training, the acc should generally be increasing, but don't worry if its absolute value remains low, as it doesn't correlate to finalised MTBench or MMLU scores. It should just be generally increasing.
Other metrics to keep an eye on are the rewards_actual_mean and rewards_generated_mean, which represent the average of the ``rewards`` as defined above. Again, the absolute values aren't necessarily so important as the fact that the actual_mean should be greater than the generated_mean over time, and the greater that difference, the better.

> All metrics will be grouped by either ``train/`` or ``val/`` in WandB, representing whether that metric is from the training or validation set, respectively.

Reviewer: Maybe also mention that we don't generate responses for validation so there is no accuracy metric? (but instead it's a standard SFT NLL loss)

Author: I have added a section discussing this, let me know if it suffices

When it comes to ideal hyperparameters for SPIN training, much will depend on the characteristics of your SFT (or base/foundational) model and your training data, so there is no one-size-fits-all parameter set which will work in all cases.

> However, the following the following is a brief overview of which hyperparameters we have perturbed for various model sizes and their effects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the following is a brief overview of which hyperparameters we have perturbed for various model sizes and their effects:
```

Author: Fixed, thanks

> * global_batch_size: the SPIN paper recommends 64 for a 7B model, which we have found holds true, in that higher GBS for 7B models performs much worse. For larger models, you can increase to 128 or 256 as needed, but recommend you start with 64 as a baseline

Reviewer: add "we"
```suggestion
* global_batch_size: the SPIN paper recommends 64 for a 7B model, which we have found holds true, in that higher GBS for 7B models performs much worse. For larger models, you can increase to 128 or 256 as needed, but we recommend you start with 64 as a baseline
```

Author: Fixed, thanks

> * iterations/epochs: the SPIN paper used iterations=3 and epochs=2 for their training on a 7B model with a training dataset size of 200k. Using the same foundational model as the authors, we found better results with iterations=1, epochs=1 using a 50k subset of their 200k data. We therefore recommend starting with iterations=1, and increasing to 2 as needed by testing on MT-Bench/MMLU.

Reviewer: I think we should mention the fact that our current implementation doesn't increase the size of the training set on iterations 2+, as in the SPIN paper. We don't know to which extent this may be important to get good results with more iterations (right?).

Author: I have added a line about that, let me know if it suffices
